---
title: "TOI-1075 b: A Dense, Massive, Ultra-short-period Hot Super-Earth Straddling the Radius Gap"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2023-01-01-toi
date: 2023-01-01
venue: 'The Astronomical Journal'
paperurl: 'https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ac9c5b'
citation: 'Essack, Zahra and Shporer, Avi and Burt, Jennifer A. and Seager, Sara and Cambioni, Saverio and Lin, Zifan and Collins, Karen A. and Mamajek, Eric E. and Stassun, Keivan G. and Ricker, George R. and Vanderspek, Roland and Latham, David W. and Winn, Joshua N. and Jenkins, Jon M. and Butler, R. Paul and Charbonneau, David and Collins, Kevin I. and Crane, Jeffrey D. and Gan, Tianjun and Hellier, Coel and Howell, Steve B. and Irwin, Jonathan and Mann, Andrew W. and Ramadhan, Ali and Shectman, Stephen A. and Teske, Johanna K. and Yee, Samuel W. and Mireles, Ismael and Quintana, Elisa V. and Tenenbaum, Peter and Torres, Guillermo and Furlan, Elise. (2023). "TOI-1075 b: A Dense, Massive, Ultra-short-period Hot Super-Earth Straddling the Radius Gap." <i>The Astronomical Journal</i>.'
---

Populating the exoplanet mass-radius diagram in order to identify the underlying relationship that governs planet composition is driving an interdisciplinary effort within the exoplanet community. The discovery of hot super-Earths - a high-temperature, short-period subset of the super-Earth planet population - has presented many unresolved questions concerning the formation, evolution, and composition of rocky planets. We report the discovery of a transiting, ultra-short-period hot super-Earth orbiting TOI-1075 (TIC351601843), a nearby (d = 61.4 pc) late-K/early-M-dwarf star, using data from the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite. The newly discovered planet has a radius of 1.791 $$R_\oplus$$ and an orbital period of 0.605 day (14.5 hr). We precisely measure the planet mass to be 9.95 $$M_\oplus$$ using radial velocity measurements obtained with the Planet Finder Spectrograph mounted on the Magellan II telescope. Our radial velocity data also show a long-term trend, suggesting an additional planet in the system. While TOI-1075 b is expected to have a substantial H/He atmosphere given its size relative to the radius gap, its high density (g cm^-3^) is likely inconsistent with this possibility. We explore TOI-1075 b's location relative to the M-dwarf radius valley, evaluate the planet's prospects for atmospheric characterization, and discuss potential planet formation mechanisms. Studying the TOI-1075 system in the broader context of ultra-short-period planetary systems is necessary for testing planet formation and evolution theories and density-enhancing mechanisms and for future atmospheric and surface characterization studies via emission spectroscopy with the JWST.
