---
title: "JWST-TST DREAMS: Nonuniform Dayside Emission for WASP-17b from MIRI/LRS"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2024-01-01-jwst
date: 2024-01-01
venue: 'The Astronomical Journal'
paperurl: 'https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ad5c61'
citation: 'Valentine, Daniel and Wakeford, Hannah R. and Challener, Ryan C. and Batalha, Natasha E. and Lewis, Nikole K. and Grant, David and Mullens, Elijah and Alderson, Lili and Goyal, Jayesh and MacDonald, Ryan J. and May, Erin M. and Seager, Sara and Stevenson, Kevin B. and Valenti, Jeff A. and Allen, Natalie H. and Espinoza, Néstor and Glidden, Ana and Gressier, Amélie and Huang, Jingcheng and Lin, Zifan and Long, Douglas and Louie, Dana R. and Clampin, Mark and Perrin, Marshall and Marel, Roeland P. van der and Mountain, C. Matt. (2024). "JWST-TST DREAMS: Nonuniform Dayside Emission for WASP-17b from MIRI/LRS." <i>The Astronomical Journal</i>.'
---

We present the first spectroscopic characterization of the dayside atmosphere of WASP-17b in the mid-infrared using a single JWST MIRI/LRS eclipse observation. From forward-model fits to the 5–12 μm emission spectrum, we tightly constrain the heat redistribution factor of WASP-17b to be 0.92 ± 0.02 at the pressures probed by this data, indicative of inefficient global heat redistribution. We also marginally detect a supersolar abundance of water, consistent with previous findings for WASP-17b, but note our weak constraints on this parameter. These results reflect the thermodynamically rich but chemically poor information content of MIRI/LRS emission data for high-temperature hot Jupiters. Using the eclipse mapping method, which utilizes the signals that the spatial emission profile of an exoplanet imprints on the eclipse light curve during ingress/egress due to its partial occultation by the host star, we also construct the first eclipse map of WASP-17b, allowing us to diagnose its multidimensional atmospheric dynamics for the first time. We find a day–night temperature contrast of order 1000 K at the pressures probed by this data, consistent with our derived heat redistribution factor, along with an eastward longitudinal hotspot offset of , indicative of the presence of an equatorial jet induced by day–night thermal forcing being the dominant redistributor of heat from the substellar point. These dynamics are consistent with general circulation model predictions for WASP-17b. This work is part of a series of studies by the JWST Telescope Scientist Team, in which we use Guaranteed Time Observations to perform Deep Reconnaissance of Exoplanet Atmospheres through Multi-instrument Spectroscopy.
